# Data description

The research question will be answered with three types of datasets. A human-subjects dataset of movement data representing user travel collected from backcountry user groups will be used to identify used campsite locations. Several publicly available raster datasets will be used to quantify landscape features. Additionally, publicly available vector datasets will also be used to quantify landscape features.

# Roles and responsibilities

Data collection and generation:
Data collection was from human subjects was the responsibility of a team of graduate students working in the field. Data were collected from backcountry users during their trips in the backcountry. Raster and vector data collected from publicly available sources is the respondsibility of one graduate student working on research questions associated with these data. 

Protection of sensitive and protected data:
Protection of sensitive data is the responsibility of the principle investigator on the research team; however, each individual researcher and graduate student on the project has the responsibility ot uphold human subjects training and IRB data collection approvals when dealing with human subjects data. It should be noted, the data collected for this project is not of a sensitive or private nature. 

Instrumentation and Maintenance:
The responsibility to select and test instrumentation was a team effort, with the ultimate responsibility residing with the PI but actual testing and fine tuning carried out by graduate students and post-doctoral researchers. The maintenance of the instruments in the field was the responsbility of the team of graduate students collecting data onsite.

Data Organization:
A post-doctoral researcher is responsible for implementing the data organization for the human subjects data and the graduate students are responsible for following that data organization plan. The organization of the publicly available data is the responsibility of the graduate student working on the research questions using that data.

Metadata Generation:
Generation of appropriate metadata is the responsibility of the individual graduate students working on cleaning, organizing, and generating variables for analysis for this project. Each time editions are made to a dataset or new data are created from original data, the metadata should be documented. Ultimately, the PI for the project is responsible for setting and upholding the metadata standards, while the graduate students are responsible for implementation. 

Quality Control:
Quality control checks occur at several stages in the data collection and analysis process. It is the responsibility of individual graduate students and researchers working with the data to check the data to ensure that prior to a new analysis being performed, the data serving as "inputs" are correct and of a high quality.

Data Analysis: 
Primary role of the graduate students on the project is data analysis, with responsibility for the analysis being formally held by the project PIs.  

Data Management Plan Implementation:
The project PI is responsile for DMP implementation among the project team. This individual assigns roles and sets standards for the team to follow.

# Data standards and metadata
The metadata standard that will be used to document data for this project is the Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM), Version 2 established and defined in the Federal Geographic Data Committee Metadata Guidelines for the United States. The CSDGM standard was designed for the field of geospatial science to help researchers create consistent metadata for spatial data. The CSDGM provides a framework that lists out the seven components for the standard: identification information, data quality information, spatial data organization information, spatial references information, entity and attribute information, distribution information, and metadata reference information.

The CSDGM standards will be applied to the datasets generated through this project as all anticipated input and output datasets are expected to be spatial. Each data layer will be documented using the seven recommended metadata elements. Specifically, the CSDGM standards will be used to document both the primary GPS dataset and also any secondary data layers that I generate through analyses in ArcGIS or R that will be used as model inputs.

# Storage and security
The data that will be stored for this project include the primary GPS dataset of visitor travel patterns and the following raster files for the study area: a digital elevation model of the study area, binary raster files representing presence or absence of land cover feature classes, a distance raster, and a slope raster. The data will be retained by the graduate student for the duration of the graduate student’s time at OSU (4 years), and will subsequently be transferred to the project PI and Scholar’s Archive for long-term storage. With submission to Scholar’s Archive, the data will be stored in perpetuity as long as the repository is maintained by OSU.

The data for this project will be stored in three primary locations while the project is active: on the lead graduate student’s local research laptop, on the lead graduate student’s local research external hard drive, and on OSU’s cloud storage service, Box. The data stored on the local research laptop will be the active working dataset, with the student accessing and analyzing the data using this equipment. Any changes to the data and/or newly derived datasets or research related data products will be backed-up to both the external hard drive and the cloud-storage service Box. Data will be backed-up weekly or more frequently (daily) depending on the project-related analysis activities going on in a given week. During the project, data back-up to Box will be down automatically using syncing tools provided by Box and data back-up to the external hard drive will be done manually. 

At the end of the project, the final datasets will be backed-up to Box, delivered to the PI for institutional storage, and also submitted to the OSU Scholars Archive repository. The administrative rights on the Box repository will be updated to ensure that the project PI has full access to the Box repository and that it does not disappear when the graduate student’s account is no longer active. The data will be submitted to the OSU Scholars Archive only after publication of journal articles.  

# Access and data sharing
The three datasets used in this research will be treated uniquely with regard to data sharing and public access. The first dataset, the dataset of travel routes collected from human subjects will not be shared publicly. This is because the data were collected under an IRB approval that did not include explicit reference to public sharing of the dataset by the research team. The data will be delivered to the protected area managers as stated in the purpose of the research provided to the participants upon invitation to particpate in the study. The protected area managers will then have the option to manage and share the data according to their standards and regulations. 

The other two geospatial datasets, the vector datasets and raster datasets, can be shared publicly, and will be made available at the end of the project after publication of scientific findings in a journal article. The inputs for these data originate from publicly available data. They were downloaded from a federal data clearinghouse with permissions for use in scientific research. The outputs from the analysis of these publicly available layers will be new raster geospatial data layers that serve as inputs into modeling. These interim datasets will be made available as supplementary materials at the publishing stage for data verificaiton and documentation. No restrictions limit the sharing of these data (that I am aware of) except the desire by the research team to first publish finishings before sharing the dataset. Given these restrictions, the general federal guideance of waiting two years from collection of the data publishing the data will be followed. Additionally, given that the source data for the secondary datasets is already available to the public for access and use, the sharing of the secondary derived datasets would not prevent the public from using the available information as desired. The data will be made available for use following the same licensing as is provided for the source data: data used must be cited and used for scientific or other research, not direct commercial gain.

# Archiving and preservation
The data used in this research are in electronic format, therefore, data archiving and preservation will be done using eletronic platforms. Two main repositories will host data used in this project for the long-term. First, the GPS travel pattern data will be preserved following the guidelines of the agency for which it was collected. These guidelines state that the final dataset will be transfered to the agency for preservation and sharing following the agency's policies. The data will be stored as both .CSV files and .SHP files. A .CSV file can be imported back into a .SHP file for use in geospatial softwares. The .SHP will be stored as well, despite it being a proprietary format. That way, the .SHP can be accessed directly by researchers desiring to use the .SHP format and the .CSV format will provide the raw data as well. At this time, I am unsure of the agency's policies for length of data preservation; however, I have seen data available for 50+ years (data is available from the 1970s) in the existing online archive, so I anticipate the that data will be preserved, in perpetuity, as long as online archiving and preservation is customery. 

Second, the secondary geospatial data layers will be submitted to Scholars Archive at OSU for data archiving at the end of the project. The data will be transfered in RASTER format, as I am unsure of another data format that would be appropriate for storing raster data in a more open access format at this time. If appropriate, .TIF could be used, but that format does change the structure of the datasat from a grid of squares to a grid of triangles, so that is not the prefered option. The OSU Scholars Archive platform does not advertise a length for which the data will be preserved, but it does include the following language that suggests the data will be preserved in the long term, "OSU Libraries is committed to maintaining and preserving content and associated metadata stored within ScholarsArchive@OSU." 

For all datsets, researchers will retain the above-described versions of the data in their personal records as well as important secondary datasets that document the process of generating the final datsaets for the project. The use of these two described platforms for archiving data puts the responsibility for data preservation on either the agency that funded the data collected or Oregon State University, rather than the research team. 

Repository with source code [here](https://github.com/clarallebot/GRAD521_DMPtemplate)
